Firstly, let us say thank you to Heritage Lottery in Wales for enabling us to bring
you these podcasts.
My name is Jamie Baker and I'm part of Horn Development Association, HDA in Cardiff.
And this site, Black Diverse and Welsh, is intended to bring together lots of initiatives
that we've been involved in in terms of Black and Diverse people in Wales.
But most immediately, a series of episodes, a series of contributions, which are about
Cardiff.
And if you sit outside the Norwegian church on the bay in Cardiff and in better times
have a cup of coffee, hopefully this series of podcasts over the next few months will
give you an idea what that place you're looking at used to be, what's happened there and
what it represents to the people who live or lived in the streets you, to a large extent,
can't see anymore.
This is episode six of the series of podcasts and it's with Richard Ford.
We're recording, so wherever you want to start mate.
OK, right.
My name is Richard Ford.
I'm 61 years of age at this moment in time.
I'm one of nine children, mixed heritage, Caribbean, from Barbados, my grandfather.
My grandfather on my mother's side was from Yemen and the rest of us are mainly Welsh.
I lived in West Coast, which was kind of in between the docks and Tiger Bay.
And I grew up, as I say, one of nine children.
My first memory I come up with pop bottles.
We used to have glass pop bottles and people would ask you to go to the shop or you'd ask
them if they want anything in the shop because you would go in.
And for going in return instead of giving you money, they'd give you bottles to take
back because you got money off them.
So that was helpful to yourself and obviously to the state of the world right now because
now we're using too much plastic.
Timber floats, right?
There was a place called the timber floats.
They used to have logs in that and in water basically and we used to go fishing over there
with my brothers.
Basically, my brother used to take me out of the house because I was like four or five
and I'd sit on the riverbank.
And on two occasions I went fishing with him.
I fell in.
So that was another memory that stuck in my mind.
In West Coast we had this place called the Patch outside everyone's house.
It's kind of built in a circle.
It's still there now, right at this moment, but they have built gardens on it, which is
not the same as it was obviously back in the day.
We used to be able to, in winter, throw ice, throw water on the Patch to make ice so we'd
have slides.
That was a great fun and didn't cost anything and didn't hurt anybody, hurt yourselves.
Teenagers, teenage life, we used to go to Top Rank, which was in town, and we used to
go to Under 18's Discos.
So that was on a Tuesday evening and Saturday morning.
And we would always, as an area, meet up outside after it finished, the dances had finished,
and we'd all walk home or we'd meet outside and in a place called Caroline Street so everyone
could kind of get back home, down to the bay, safely.
Because a lot of times...
Chippies and kebabs.
Sorry?
Yeah.
Caroline Street.
So, you know, it's kind of a way of getting home safely and making sure everybody got
home safely because a lot of times you get stopped by the police in harassed.
It's interesting, one thing about, I'll just interrupt Rich and say, the difference between
being in the docks and the bay, Tiger Bay, and going under that bridge into town.
Unbelievable.
Foreign territory.
And I worked there for 20 years afterwards.
So it's still kind of strange because as you say, foreign territory, even though I worked
there.
The funeral, this is something that we did, the Leibar was known as to do, carried our
owned from the houses up to the church or the mosque.
And after the service, we would always bury the person as a mark of respect.
When they've done...
For people who don't understand, Richard, when you say bury them, give them an idea
of what was involved for all the men.
We would all get a shovel.
As many shovels as you could get.
And the grave would be open and we would fill the grave in.
And I think that stems back, way, way back.
Yeah, I mean it's a Muslim tradition, but the bay...
No, no.
Well, in other countries, it's a Muslim tradition, but in the bay, there was no difference on
faiths, was there?
You took the best of each.
No, not at all.
Not at all.
Because it stemmed from poverty.
So save money, everyone helped.
And it's a tradition that's passed on from one generation to another.
So it keeps the community strong as well, unfortunately.
It's an act that we all have to go through.
It's nice to think that someone's going to give your family the same respect that you
gave to them.
We went to Sunday school, which was called Band of Hope.
That was in Hannah Street.
And that was a Tuesday evening and Sunday morning.
And then obviously later on, we go to St. Mary's Church.
Yeah, my wife's telling me where they gave you sweets to go to Hannah Street.
At St. Mary's Church, they had a local football team, which we used to go around playing.
Kings from the parishes.
And also going up the valleys now, which was another experience.
Just to play football and getting chased off the pitch because of the colour of your skin,
basically.
You're talking like late 60s, early 70s.
I mean, it was still a problem, racism.
But it wasn't a problem in the Bay, in Tiger Bay or the Docks?
Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no.
Everybody was welcome.
I always said the only way you could find trouble in the Bay and the Docks was if you
came looking for it.
Otherwise, you were welcome with open arms.
I've always taught my kids as well.
You can't buy respect.
You have to earn it.
Yeah, I know I was taught.
You don't look for trouble.
No.
But you're ready if trouble comes.
Yeah.
And those who know you are expected to have your back.
Yes, yes, definitely.
And we both know that from older times.
From growing up.
In top rank and other places.
Yeah, definitely.
It's all right.
You have someone always at your back because you're proud of growing up and finding yourself.
And as a child, I say a child, like eight or nine, ten, that kind of age, taught by
my parents to don't come in crying.
If you got yourself in a fight and it's someone of your own age and size and things, you go
back out there.
If it was somebody bigger and older than me, I have brothers.
Then, you know, my mother turned my brothers in because I'm being bullied.
But otherwise, I have to stick up for myself, which made me a stronger character.
And it also taught me not to be a bully as well.
I respect people.
And I was speaking to Karen Alley earlier on.
OK.
And she was saying about how people showed respect to older people by calling them auntie
and uncle and stuff like that.
That's very true.
Yes.
Yeah.
That's something I also pass on to my children.
And the youngest one turned around to me and he said to me, after I introduced him to my
closest friend, Rosie Parrish.
And I said to him, this is Auntie Rosie.
And he said to me, right dad.
He said, no, is this respect or blood?
That was his way of differentiating because he's got a lot of aunties and uncles.
So, you know, it enabled him to find out who's who.
Yeah, we go for big families.
Yeah.
So one of nine.
My father was one of 13.
I worked as a youth worker for a thing called Community Roots.
And I was to assist people who were unemployed to try and help them get back into work.
And it was run at Chalky White's Youth Center.
So I created our own football team.
It was the first one we had down there.
And we got to be successful and won the Wednesday League.
There was about 15 sides.
And we won the cup.
And we've done that for about four or five years.
You mentioned Rosie Parrish.
Yes.
And it made me think of Frankie Parrish.
Frankie, yeah.
And the Kayaks.
Right.
I was in only a couple of months ago.
I was in Bridge End.
And somebody said to me, came up to me and said, do you know the Kayaks?
Mr. J said, hardest team we ever played rugby against.
He said, hardest team we ever played.
He said, I can't understand.
All those boys weren't playing for Cardiff.
I said, nor could we.
Because we were discriminated against.
And my cousin had the worst one of all.
He represented his country.
Stephen, Stephen Ford.
But because he went for a trial at Bradford.
Rugby League.
And came back.
Sorry, the other code, rugby league.
He came back from that and he got suspended.
I think it was like six months he couldn't play.
And he also got a fine.
Which was a lot when you were an amateur because he was at those times.
And they couldn't work out why so many black or mixed race kids ended up at rugby league.
Yes, because that's what they used to do.
Yeah, and it was the only way they made a wage.
That's right.
And they were noted for their skills.
And many of them had lots of skill.
So naturally, I mean if someone's going to say to you, play for nothing or play for whatever, X amount a week.
Obviously you're going to take the money because that's what you're there for.
Especially when they show you respect.
And the fans cheer you.
Yes.
You know.
We've all been in those games where you take so much abuse from the sidelines.
That you just start to ignore it.
And show your own skills and rise above it.
We had the second biggest carnival in Britain before it got cut.
Before they cut the budget.
That was kind of pay taking over and deciding that.
Because we had so many people going down to the park.
By the community center.
It was like five, six thousand.
In that time there was a lot of people.
They decided in their wisdom that they would cut our budgets.
We couldn't run it anymore.
And they put the thing up by the county hall on the August.
It was a fair with live stages.
Not stages.
A live band, sorry.
Went to the dance from the community center.
From a young man till present day.
Until COVID has cut it.
Community center is a local center basically.
As I said, state's community center.
Our ages, our walks of life.
Going there to meet up.
Funerals, weddings.
Mostly funerals.
Occasional weddings.
But they would have dances as well on Saturday night.
And we'd have coaches coming down from London, Birmingham, Bristol.
Everywhere.
All over Britain.
And they'd play dominoes together and have a dance later on.
I used to work in the Casablanca.
Ah, that's a place I remember.
Go on.
Very special.
Definitely.
And we used to have sound systems coming from all over Britain.
But we also used to do live bands.
And I was a doorman at the time.
And the DJ had actually had an argument with the boss.
And quit.
So they said to me, you've got to step in.
Never DJ'd in my life.
Right.
Okay.
So I played, bought us some music.
So they said to me, right.
Okay.
Now your job is DJing.
And you've now got to book the bands.
Okay.
So I did that.
And I mixed the mixing desk.
All untrained.
Never been trained in any of it.
I just put my ear to it and thought, well, I could do it.
So I will go.
And this is my creme de creme cockup.
I booked this band on the Friday gig.
Laverne Brown Band.
Right.
But when I phoned up the echo.
Because they used to do a publication for the weekend.
I booked it as Laverne Brown Band and Spasm Band.
Right.
But they were rival bands.
They didn't kind of get on and play together.
Avoid each other.
But Spasm Band were playing somewhere else.
And their gig finished early.
So they just turned up.
And both crowds were there.
And then the crowd turned up.
And we had a wicked night.
It was jammed.
We couldn't move in there.
By 11 o'clock it was empty.
By half past 11.
I opened the door.
And I said, we've got a queue.
Next thing you know, it was full.
Non-stop.
So good things come out of it.
The thing about the castle that I remember more than anything else is.
It was neutral territory.
You know as someone on the door.
Yeah.
But the curses stopped when people walked in the door.
And it didn't matter what you did as a living.
You know, speaking about some of the ladies.
Then you were treated with respect.
Or you or a person bothering you left.
Yep.
That always impressed me.
You know, it was just.
Everybody was treated with respect.
If they acted with respect.
Very true. Very, very true.
And it's something, you know.
You give and you get back.
But that's a skill for someone on the door.
That is a real skill.
And if you had a problem take it outside and sort it.
End of story.
There we are.
And we grew up with the Mardi Gras.
And we had a week of full events in the youth club and the community centre.
Chalky White's place was special wasn't it?
You know what I mean?
Unbelievable.
Brilliant times.
Kids don't have that kind of place nowadays.
And he was a special man.
Because he was a great leader.
You know, a lot of people would say little bitchy things.
Because they didn't understand how we operated.
And everybody wanted their own piece of the pie basically.
But at the end of the day.
He did a lot for our community.
A lot.
And me resting in peace and ultimate respect to him.
For the man he was.
People like Chalky White, Betty Campbell.
Betty Campbell, yep.
They were leaders.
And my saying is leaders lead.
Yeah.
And it's not about them.
That's the thing.
They always look forward about the kids and where they're going.
What you can do.
Yep.
A lot of people were told by Chalky White or Betty Campbell.
You can be something.
Do this. Yep. You can do it.
Betty always proved it.
Because she was my mentor.
And sorry, not my mentor.
When you go for a job.
Reference.
Always.
So any job I got.
I got with thanks to Betty.
Because she was always my referee.
And always put on a good reference for me.
But she was honest about it.
She was honest about it recently.
Yes, she was lots of people's referees.
But she wouldn't lie.
No, no, no, no.
If you messed up, you'd have to go and see her.
At the end of the day.
And she'd tell you a script.
And there was another lady like that.
May you rest in peace.
Aubrey Laskins.
Yeah.
Who's his mother.
She was a teacher in the school.
Same time as Betty.
And she was very, very, very strict.
Per se.
Yeah.
Karen mentioned her as well.
Wonderful lady.
One of the questions I guess is.
We all got grandkids or kids or whatever.
And you think.
Are those.
Is it possible now.
For those teachers to be that way.
Do you know what I mean?
Betty Campbell didn't have to worry about.
People's parents.
You know the parents would say.
She's in your care.
That's right.
You decide.
None of this.
My child didn't do it.
And if you disrespected your teachers.
You didn't want to go home either.
No.
You know the one I always found.
If you've done something wrong.
I didn't like.
I don't know.
We used to go over the docks.
Yeah.
Occasionally as a child and you weren't supposed to.
And someone seeing you that knew your family.
Would go and tell your family.
So you're getting home.
And your parents already know.
Before you got home.
And you're thinking.
Well how do they know.
Who's seen me.
Because that was it.
Without confronting you about it.
But they were also looking out for you.
Because you were being somewhere you shouldn't have been.
And then.
Parents will tell you off.
Or keep you in or ground you.
And if there was something serious.
Then you would have been licked.
Yeah.
These things happen.
We won't say whether they're right or wrong.
Licks.
Yeah we've talked about those all day.
So I've got to the end of my notes.
I mean Richard.
I mean.
Richard.
Richard thank you.
You're welcome.
I mean the point is.
And I'll say this.
I'll be saying this on every single one.
If somebody is sat at the Norwegian church.
Having a coffee.
In better times.
And they're looking across at those nice restaurants.
And all the rest of it.
They're going to understand.
These were real people.
And what you read about them.
I mean it's not a script.
Where you've got people like Neil Sinclair.
You know.
But it isn't written by them.
And one of the things that struck me the other day.
Was the smells.
You know if you were walking.
Through.
Through the bay.
And cafes.
You know.
You could eat around the world.
In one little place.
Definitely.
And you could cook for like seven different people.
At meal times.
And then outside families would come in.
Because you know.
So and so is working.
Or my mother's babysitting this one.
And so we would maybe have.
12 or 14 people at the table.
Or sit-ins.
Crazy.
But like you say.
You could eat from around the world.
Because there were so many different cultures.
I can remember my nan.
My family.
My family were over.
Over Barry from the cold cot.
Originally Thompson Street we were from.
And I can remember my nan.
Was totally.
Bermused when she got older.
Because she was cooking for just her.
And my uncle.
She couldn't cook for two people.
She didn't know how.
Yes.
Because they used notes.
And if you had money.
You could have a match on the table.
Because someone else.
To just say to somebody.
Oh we got spare if you want something to eat.
Because they had nothing at that moment.
That's that thing of coming from merchant navy families.
Somebody's just got off a ship with a couple of Bob.
Somebody else hasn't got any money.
And the women ran it.
The women ran it.
Went off to docks.
My mother was five foot four.
A little pocket rocket.
Strong woman.
So she raised nine kids.
Yeah.
People don't realize just how many.
How many men disappeared from the.
On the merchant.
In both wars.
And it was the women who kept it going.
Had to be there didn't they?
Yeah.
Somehow we need to show them that respect.
Somehow you know there's a.
People talk about statues.
It would be nice if there was a statue of.
A mother.
Just a mother.
Without a face.
Yeah and a lot of people would be confused.
Because they think.
They see the bay and the docks as being black.
But you know there's.
Many many many of the women that brought us up were white.
Or a mixed origin.
Yeah and their nans were.
You know what I mean.
Yeah.
My nan on my.
My nan on my mum's side and my father's side.
Yeah and they ran it.
They did it.
Yeah.
Those are good memories.
So if just having a chat about them.
Is taking you back to there a bit.
Then I'm pleased.
Yes we've done a good job.
You've triggered my memory going.
And these times.
We need to go back a bit and look at those times.
And go yeah it was hard then.
We did it.
Yes.
And here we are.
Still standing.
Okay thanks mate.
I'm great.
Brilliant.
Good job.
Take care.
Peace be with you.